Docs: Instrument a backend plugin (#547)
grafana/plugin-tools: docusaurus/docs/create-a-plugin/extend-a-plugin/add-logs-metrics-traces-for-backend-plugins.md

---
id: add-logs-metrics-traces-for-backend-plugins
title: Add logs, metrics and traces for backend plugins
description: How to add logs, metrics and traces for backend plugins.
keywords:
  - grafana
  - plugins
  - plugin
  - instrument
  - instrumentation
  - logs
  - metrics
  - distributed tracing
  - tracing
  - backend
  - back-end
---

# Add logs, metrics and traces for backend plugins

> Guidance, conventions and best practices for adding logs, metrics and traces for backend plugins to make it easier to diagnose and resolve issues for both plugin developers and Grafana operators.

Reviewer: I think "document" is okay here. More commonly, we say "documentation". And "topic" is technically accurate.

## Logs

Logs are files that record events, warnings and errors as they occur within a software environment. Most logs include contextual information, such as the time an event occurred and which user or endpoint was associated with it.

### Implement logging in your plugin

Using the global logger, `backend.Logger`, from the [backend package](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend) works everywhere and for most use cases.

> **Example:**

Author: I've added some explanations of each example

    "github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend"
    "github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/instancemgmt"
)

func NewDatasource(ctx context.Context, settings backend.DataSourceInstanceSettings) (instancemgmt.Instance, error) {
    // instantiates a logger that will include the datasource UID
    // key-value pair over the lifetime of this instance.
    logger := backend.Logger.With("dsUID", settings.UID)

    return &Datasource{
        logger: logger,
    }, nil
}

func (ds *Datasource) QueryData(ctx context.Context, req *backend.QueryDataRequest) (*backend.QueryDataResponse, error) {
    ds.logger.Debug("Debug msg", "someID", 1)
    ds.logger.Info("Info msg", "queryType", "default")
    ds.logger.Warning("Warning msg", "key", "value")
    ds.logger.Error("Error msg", "error", errors.New("An error occurred"))
}
```

:::note

You can also use `backend.NewLoggerWith` from the [backend package](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend) which is a helper method that calls `log.New().With(args...)` from the [log package](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/backend/log).

:::

#### Use a contextual logger

> Use a contextual logger to automatically include additional key-value pairs attached to `context.Context`. For example, you can use `traceID` to allow correlating logs with traces and to correlate logs with a common identifier. You can create a new contextual logger by using the `FromContext` method on your instantiated logger; you can also combine this method when [reusing logger with certain key-value pairs](#reuse-logger-with-certain-keyvalue-pairs). We recommend using a contextual logger whenever you have access to a `context.Context`.

Author: It doesn't work :smile:

> Use a contextual logger to automatically include additional key-value pairs attached to `context.Context`. For example, you can use `traceID` to allow correlating logs with traces and to correlate logs with a common identifier. You can create a new contextual logger by using the `FromContext` method on your instantiated logger; you can also combine this method when [reusing logger with certain key-value pairs](#reuse-logger-with-certain-keyvalue-pairs). We recommend using a contextual logger whenever you have access to a `context.Context`.

Author: Or it's basically the same as not using a contextual logger, i.e. `logger.FromContext(context.Background())` is equal to logger. Don't think we need to try explaining this, too much details. WDYT?

- Prefer using camelCase style when naming log keys; for example, `remoteAddr` or `userID`, to be consistent with Go identifiers.
- Use the key `error` when logging Go errors; for example, `logger.Error("Something failed", "error", errors.New("An error occurred")`.
- Use a contextual logger whenever you have access to a `context.Context`.
- Do not log sensitive information, such as data source credentials or IP addresses, or other personally identifiable information.

#### Validate and sanitize input coming from user input

If log messages or key-value pairs originate from user input they should be validated and sanitized. Be careful to not expose any sensitive information in log messages (secrets, credentials, and so on). It's especially easy to do by mistake when including a Go struct as a value.

#### When to use which log level?

- **Debug:** Informational messages of high frequency and/or less-important messages during normal operations.
- **Info:** Informational messages of low frequency and/or important messages.

> - **Warning:** Should in normal cases not be needed. If used, it should be actionable.

Author: Pushed some changes try to make this easier to understand. Removed `Should in normal cases not be needed` for now.

- **Error:** Error messages indicating some operation failed (with an error) and the program didn't have a way to handle the error.

:::note

> Incoming requests of high frequency are normally more common for the `QueryData` endpoint, since--for example--the nature of a dashboard generates a request per panel or query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Incoming requests of high frequency are normally more common for the `QueryData` endpoint, since - for example - the nature of a dashboard generates a request per panel or query.
```

:::

### Inspect logs locally

Logs from a backend plugin are consumed by the connected Grafana instance and included in the Grafana server log.

> Each log message for a backend plugin will include a name, `logger=plugin.<plugin id>`. Example:

Reviewer 2: pluginID is called out as a feature of a contextual logger, if this is present in the base logger too maybe we could make that clearer? Perhaps as an example of the output log message in each of the examples?

Author: Done

ERROR[11-14|15:26:26] Error msg     logger=plugin.grafana-helloworld-app error=An error occurred
```

You can enable [debug logging in your Grafana instance](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/troubleshooting/#troubleshoot-with-logs) and that will normally output a huge amount of information and make it hard to find the logs related to a certain plugin. However, using a named logger makes it convenient to enable debug logging only for a certain named logger and/or plugin:

```
[log]
filters = plugin.<plugin id>:debug
```

Please refer to [Configure Grafana](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/#log) for more details about setting up logging.

Further, see [How to collect and visualize logs, metrics and traces](#collect-and-visualize-logs-metrics-and-traces).

## Metrics

Metrics are quantifiable measurements that reflect the health and performance of applications or infrastructure.

Consider using metrics to provide real-time insight into the state of resources. If you want to know how responsive your plugin is or identify anomalies that could be early signs of a performance issue, metrics are a key source of visibility.

> ### Metric types

Reviewer 2: WDYT about giving a (brief) summary of the referenced material and then linked out for further reading. 

Even just expanding the acronym i.e. 
Rate (the number of requests per second)
Errors (the number of those requests that are failing)
Duration (the amount of time those requests take)

Author: I extended it a bit and decided to remove the RED reference altogether.

See [Prometheus metric types](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/) for a list and description of the different metric types you can use and when to use them.

> There are many possible types of metrics that can be tracked. One popular method for defining metrics is the [RED method](https://grafana.com/blog/2018/08/02/the-red-method-how-to-instrument-your-services/).

Reviewer 2: the preceding sentence using "metric types" then saying "types of metrics" here feels like we're mixing type/method.

```suggestion
There are many possible metrics that can be tracked. One popular method for defining which metrics to monitor is the [RED method](https://grafana.com/blog/2018/08/02/the-red-method-how-to-instrument-your-services/).
```

### Implement metrics in your plugin

> [Grafana plugin SDK for Go](../../introduction/grafana-plugin-sdk-for-go.md) uses the [Prometheus instrumentation library for Go applications](https://github.com/prometheus/client_golang). Any custom metric registered with the [default registry](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus#pkg-variables) will be picked up by the SDK and exposed through the [Collect metrics capability](../../introduction/backend.md#collect-metrics).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [Grafana plugin SDK for Go](../../introduction/grafana-plugin-sdk-for-go.md) uses the [Prometheus instrumentation library for Go applications](https://github.com/prometheus/client_golang). Any custom metric registered with the [default registry](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus#pkg-variables) will be picked up by the SDK and exposed through the [Collect metrics capability](../../introduction/backend.md#collect-metrics).
```

> For convenience, it's recommended to use the [promauto package](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus/promauto) when creating custom metrics since it automatically registers the metric in the [default registry](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus#pkg-variables) and expose them to Grafana.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For convenience, it's recommended to use the [promauto package](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus/promauto) when creating custom metrics since it automatically registers the metric in the [default registry](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/prometheus/client_golang/prometheus#pkg-variables) and exposes them to Grafana.
```

        Name:      "query",
        Help:      "Total number of queries.",
    },
    []string{"query_type"},
)

func (ds *Datasource) QueryData(ctx context.Context, req *backend.QueryDataRequest) (*backend.QueryDataResponse, error) {
    for _, q := range req.Queries {
        queriesTotal.WithLabelValues(q.QueryType).Inc()
    }
}
```

### Best practices

- Consider using the namespace `grafana_plugin` as that would prefix any defined metric names with `plugin`. This will make it clear for operators that any metric named `grafana_plugin` originates from a Grafana plugin.
- Use snake case style when naming metrics, e.g. `http_request_duration_seconds` instead of `httpRequestDurationSeconds`.
- Use snake case style when naming metric labels, e.g. `status_code` instead of `statusCode`.
- If the metric type is a counter, name it with a `_total` suffix, e.g. `http_requests_total`.
- If the metric type is a histogram and you're measuring duration, name it with a `_<unit>` suffix, e.g. `http_request_duration_seconds`.
- If the metric type is a gauge, name it to denote it's a value that can increase and decrease , e.g. `http_request_in_flight`.

#### Label values and high cardinality

> Be careful with what label values you add. Using/allowing too many label values could result in high cardinality problems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Be careful with what label values you add. Using or allowing too many label values could result in high cardinality problems.
```

> If label values originate from user input they should be validated and cleaned. Use `metricutil.SanitizeLabelName("<label value>")` from pkg/infra/metrics/metricutil package to sanitize label names. Very important to only allow a predefined set of labels to minimize the risk of high cardinality problems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If label values originate from user input they should be validated and cleaned. Use `metricutil.SanitizeLabelName("<label value>")` from pkg/infra/metrics/metricutil package to sanitize label names. It is very important to only allow a predefined set of labels to minimize the risk of high cardinality problems.
```

I also think it might be good to give an example issue resulting from high cardinality somewhere in this section. Could optionally link out to another resource such as https://docs.honeycomb.io/concepts/high-cardinality/

Be careful to not expose any sensitive information in label values (secrets, credentials, and so on).

### Automatic instrumentation by the SDK

> The SDK provides automatic collection and exposure of Go runtime metrics and process metrics to ease developer and operator experience.

Reviewer 2: This feels out of place and I'm wondering if this section should come before custom metrics? Also - should/could we list or reference these? Do they follow the convention of having grafana_plugin as the namespace?

Author: Moved it and extended it a bit according to your suggestions

           os.Exit(1)
       }
   }
   ```

1. Once you have configured tracing, use the global tracer like this:

   ```go
   tracing.DefaultTracer()
   ```

   This returns an [OpenTelemetry `trace.Tracer`](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel/trace#Tracer) for creating spans.

   **Example:**

   ```go
   func (d *Datasource) query(ctx context.Context, pCtx backend.PluginContext, query backend.DataQuery) (backend.DataResponse, error) {
       ctx, span := tracing.DefaultTracer().Start(
           ctx,
           "query processing",
           trace.WithAttributes(
               attribute.String("query.ref_id", query.RefID),
               attribute.String("query.type", query.QueryType),
               attribute.Int64("query.max_data_points", query.MaxDataPoints),
               attribute.Int64("query.interval_ms", query.Interval.Milliseconds()),
               attribute.Int64("query.time_range.from", query.TimeRange.From.Unix()),
               attribute.Int64("query.time_range.to", query.TimeRange.To.Unix()),
           ),
       )
       defer span.End()

       // ...
   }
   ```

### Automatic instrumentation by the SDK

> The SDK automates some instrumentation to ease developer experience.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The SDK automates some instrumentation to ease developer experience. This section explores the default tracing added to gRPC calls and outgoing HTTP requests. 
```

Just a suggestion, otherwise it feels like a throwaway comment
